---
layout: post
title: Reflections at the end of ST 558 (Data Science for Statisticians)
---
After one semester of learning how to use R for data science, I have about the same thoughts on data science as those stated in [my blogpost on data science](https://snprim.github.io/First-Blog-Post/). Data science’s focus on building models and making predictions is apparent throughout the semester. With any dataset, our goal is to make good predictions. Often, the models are like black boxes. We are not so concerned with how the models fit the data, but we use some kind of measurements—such as RMSE or accuracy—to decide which models among those we fit perform the best. We also don’t quantify the uncertainty as we do with statistical analyses. Our results do not state the confidence intervals and hypothesis test results; although we can easily find these results, they are not the focus of data science. 

In terms of R, my thoughts remain largely the same as those stated in [my blogpost comparing R, SAS, Java, and Python](https://snprim.github.io/Second-Blog-Post/). R is quite easy to pick up; after about two weeks, I started feeling quite comfortable with it. Even with packages and functions I had not used before, I could usually look them up and use them without too much trouble. The automatic garbage collection feature in Java is indeed missed in R; garbage collection could be forced in gitbash, using `git gc`, but some kind of automatic cleanup would be nice. Debugging, especially with Shiny, could sometimes be difficult. As I mentioned in the same blogpost, not having to explicitly declare objects and their data types makes R an easier language but at the same time makes debugging more difficult. R can also be slow when the dataset gets large or when the models get complicated. Other than these three drawbacks (garbage collection, debugging, and speed), R is a wonderful and powerful language. I will definitely continue using it in the future. In fact, in my free time, I intend to use it to do more machine learning on datasets I am personally interested in and possibly build Shiny apps for them.

This course  has given me a solid foundation to go forward. I hope to continue using R for data analysis and exploring machine learning and deep learning. I am also planning on branching out a bit. As I was searching for a dataset for the final project, I realized that most of the machine learning projects out there have been achieved using Python. To make collaboration easier in the future, I plan to learn machine learning in Python. Using my current knowledge of data science, R, and machine learning, I am confident that learning how to do the same tasks in Python will not be too difficult. Moreover, some tasks might be easier and more efficient in Python. Further, Python code can be used in Rstudio; combining Python and R codes might make problem-solving more efficient (and potentially bug-filled?). I am really excited about continue using what I have learning, going deeper in R, and branching out to Python.

