---
layout: post
title: Accessing NHL Data via APIs and Creating Functions
---

In this project, I created functions to demonstrate how to retrieve information via APIs using two APIs of the National Hockey League, clean up or combine data, and then do exploratory data analysis. All the steps are presented in [my vignette](https://snprim.github.io/ST558_project_1/). This project has shown me the power and challenges of using APIs and taught me some key lessons. 

APIs provide a convenient method for information sharing, and the steps to retrieve information is rather straightforward. However, each API is a different system and requires the users to understand terms about the subject to know which endpoints are relevant. Moreover, the data structure provided in each endpoint could be very different, and knowing what data to return is the key to good API functions. I have therefore come to recognize the importance of good documentations. 

When I approach another project to access APIs in the future, I will spend more time reading documentations, understanding data structures, and gaining some domain knowledge. While writing the right code to retrieve data isn’t difficult, knowing what data to return requires understanding of the data structure of the specific API. Also, understanding what the data means and assessing whether this is what the user might want require domain knowledge. For example, in the endpoints `team.schedule.next` and `team.schedule.previous`, the key information is embedded in a data frame within one column of the larger data frame. Without knowing the data structure, we might blindly return messy data that is of no use to the users. Furthermore, without having specific questions about NHL statistics, exploratory data analysis can be challenging. Having domain knowledge can help me decide what part of the data to delete; analysis is much easier when irrelevant variables are removed. 

The most difficult part of the logic and programming in this project is perhaps writing functions for repeated use and unit testing. Retrieving a specific endpoint, or a subset of an endpoint, for myself is manageable; as long as the information retrieved is what I need, the task is done. Writing functions for APIs is a completely different story. The functions need to consider as many possible scenarios as possible to avoid potential errors; furthermore, keeping track of all the endpoints and deciding what arguments the users (or the future me) should provide are no easy tasks. Adding an index to connect team names and Ids, for example, is technically easy but requires experience in creating functions with other users in mind. Testing is another crucial aspect that I found challenging; after a function is created, effective testing can expose problems in the code. Now I understand that unit testing will be an invaluable skill to gain in the future. Overall, this project helps me refine my programming skills and think about the overall planning.

The project has several takeaways. First of all, writing code isn’t hard, but writing several hundred lines of code that all work together is hard. Secondly, writing functions for repeated use is much more difficult than writing code for a single use. Thirdly, using data sources requires understanding of the specific source and domain knowledge. Fourthly, unit testing is important. Lastly, exploratory data analysis is open-ended and requires background knowledge; when done correctly, summaries and plots can tell interesting and meaningful stories. Although this is a time-consuming project, the process is quite fun, and the lessons learned are worth the time and efforts!
