---
layout: post
title: Reflections on ST 558 (Data Science for Statisticians)
---
After one semester of learning how to use R for data science, my thoughts on data science as those stated in [my blogpost on data science](https://snprim.github.io/First-Blog-Post/) remain largely unchanged. Data science’s foci on building models and making predictions are apparent throughout the semester. With any dataset, our goal is to make good predictions, and the models are often like black boxes. We are not so concerned with how the models fit the data, but we focus on choosing the best model, using certain measurements such as RMSE or accuracy. We also do not quantify uncertainties as we do with statistical analyses. Although we can easily find the confidence intervals and hypothesis test results, they are not as central as predictions to data science. 

In terms of R, my thoughts stated in [my blogpost comparing R, SAS, Java, and Python](https://snprim.github.io/Second-Blog-Post/) still ring true. R is quite easy to pick up; after about two weeks, I started feeling quite comfortable with it. Even with packages and functions I had not used, I could usually look them up and use them without too much trouble. While using R, I miss some features in other programming languages. Java has the automatic garbage collection feature, which could be executed in gitbash with the code `git gc`, but automatic cleanup would be nice. Debugging, especially with Shiny, could be difficult. As I mentioned in the same blogpost, not having to explicitly declare objects and their data types make R an easier language but, at the same time, make debugging more difficult. R can also be slow when the dataset gets large or when the models get complicated. Other than these three drawbacks (garbage collection, debugging, and speed), R is a wonderful and powerful language. After one semester, I have come to recognize and appreciate its power; we can use R for not only data analysis and visualization but also machine learning, deep learning, and build web apps such as Shiny. I will definitely continue using R in the future. In fact, I have planned to use it for more machine learning projects on datasets I am personally interested in and build Shiny apps with them.

This course has given me a solid foundation to go forward. I hope to continue using R for data analysis and exploring machine learning and deep learning. I am also planning to branch out. As I was searching for a dataset for the final project, I noticed that most of the machine learning projects out there have been done using Python. To make collaboration easier in the future, I plan to learn machine learning in Python. With my current knowledge of data science, R, and machine learning, I am confident that learning how to do the same tasks in Python will not be too difficult. Moreover, some tasks might be easier and more efficient in Python. Further, Python code can be used in Rstudio; combining Python and R codes might make problem-solving more efficient (and potentially bug-filled?). I am excited about continuing using what I have learning, going deeper in R, and branching out into Python.
