
Besides R, I have learned Python, Java, and SAS. Obviously, each of these languages has its own pros and cons. I think R and Python are easier to start using than Java and SAS. The syntax of R and Python are intuitive, and both do not require a lot of specifications. For example, Java requires users to declare a new object and identify its data type—“int,” “double,” “char,” etc.—but, in R and Python, we can simply declare a new object and give it a value at the same time. While SAS does not require the extra steps required by Java, the syntax is not as similar to natural languages; also, it sometimes deals with codes in unexpected ways that require the users to know exactly how SAS works behind the scene to avoid bugs. For these reasons, it took me longer to get used to writing Java and SAS code than to writing R and Python codes, both of which have a lot of automatic processing behind the scene and therefore easier to pick up.

For R, it is nice to have all kinds of packages that can be easily installed. Almost every data analysis can be done with a certain package. R also has many packages for plotting. Furthermore, many R packages come with data sets. Especially for data analysis, R is a flexible and easy-to-use tool.

Although Java might be hard to learn because it requires the users to know more about the specs, the extra details make debugging easier. Also, Java emphasizes the idea of object oriented programming, and thus the codes are structured and easy to understand. Garbage collection is a wonderful feature for Java that helps free up memory, and Java is also a fast language. In terms of Python, it seems a better options to connect to online sources, whether for getting data from APIs or webscraping. Memory, speed, and webscraping are not yet something we need to concern with while using R, so I can’t quite say I “miss” Java and Python for these reasons, but these features could definitely make Java and Python better options than R under certain circumstances.

Overall, I consider R quite easy to learn, at least in the beginning. Every language can be difficult when the tasks become complex. But, as a beginner, it is easy to type in a few lines in R and, voila!, a nice-looking plot has been created. 
