---
layout: post
title: Data Science vs. Statistics
---

*“What does a data scientist do?”* This is a question I had. After reading several articles on this topic, I thought I would find a definitive and straightforward answer like “a historian is someone who studies history.” It turns out that different people have different answers. Nate Silver reportedly stated that a data scientist is no different from a statistician, while others attempted to describe the similarities and differences in terms of duties and foci for data scientists and statisticians.  

The term “data scientist” seems to suggest that a data scientist is someone who strives to understand data, as a scientist strives to understand certain domains. A rather common way to define data science is that the field is the intersection between mathematics/statistics, computer science, and specific domain knowledge. My understanding is that a data scientist’s job centers around analyzing data—much like a statistician’s job—but extends to using programming to process a large amount of data and looking for a model that accurately predict future outcomes. Data scientists, general speaking, use the appropriate data to answer any questions a business has; they not only have to know the methods to analyze data but also which sets of data to use or how to acquire such data. To achieve such a goal, besides data analysis and programming, a thorough knowledge about the product—be it a social media network, a movie-watching site, or a sock company—is crucial.  

These duties and knowledge areas are similar to those of statisticians. Data analysis is far from the only duty statisticians have to handle; understanding the specific field helps statisticians design experiments and check assumptions. As the size of data increases, programming skills have become more and more important to statisticians. However, some differences between data science and statistics are commonly suggested. **Quantifying uncertainty**, a central element of statistical analysis, is rarely a focus for data science. Further, statisticians focus more on finding answers to explain data already collected, while data scientists use data to predict future outcomes and often use incoming outcomes to adjust the model. Furthermore, statisticians often have to deal with **experimental design**. The two fields also have different terminology for similar concepts. Lastly, although this is not usually specifically stated, data scientists seem to work more in businesses while the term statisticians are more common for research institutions.  

Personally, statisticians’ emphasis on quantifying uncertainty, modeling methods, and understanding experimental designs are more attractive to me than processing real-time big data to predict users’ preferences, because I am more interested in research than the business world. Nonetheless, tools used in data science—data mining, machine learning, big data, etc.—appeal to me, because I believe that they are invaluable to research and statisticians should continue to acquire any skills that can be used to process, analyze, and understand data. 

